---
title: "The Lens of Neurodiversity: How Perceptual Experiences Shape Personality"
author: "Zhu Yecheng 3036061373"
date: "2026-04-29"
geometry: margin=2.5cm
---

The way you perceive things is an essential aspect of your identity, and therefore contributes to the way you are. People's worldviews will greatly influence what they notice, what they try not to notice, and how they cope with stress. An excellent example is how the different neurodiverse people each perceive their environment based on their differences in attention, sensory processing and social skills, which affect their daily lives, and their personality development over time (Wrzus & Roberts, 2017).

When we discuss perception, we generally refer to the five traditional senses. However, perception also includes a person's perception of time, background noise, interpreting social customs, and understanding their physical body (how they physically feel). These types of experiences and the emotions that different people experience from those experiences, shape a person's personality. They can also shape the way a person interacts with the world. In a way similar to how non-traditional senses shape personalities, experiences of comfort, stress, misunderstanding and/or acceptance can shape a person's values, coping strategies and behaviours over time (Wrzus & Roberts, 2017).

The following three examples highlight the author's experiences and those of two close friends. However, there are many other types of neurodivergent individuals that do not share the same world views, and the examples of the world views of the three individuals will highlight how different perceptions of the world impact an individual's personality.

### The Flood of Information: My ADHD Perspective

My experiences with my world through having Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) tends to be quite different from others. One key difference for me has been having a really hard time filtering out sensory input; sound and other sensory input have a tendency to get mixed into one being in busy places, and it seems as if there is always too many sounds and small changes happening at the same time. Another key difference for me is that I have a problem developing a good sense of time. This was confirmed by several psychological studies, which state that people with ADHD are uniquely capable of perceiving and feeling about time, and can also block out large amounts of sensory input when they are focused in on doing something (Mette, 2023; Micoulaud-Franchi et al., 2015).

People who have physical restlessness such as shaking legs, or twirling a pen, or biting fingernails are usually doing something with their body to keep their mind from getting drowsy, in some way because their brain has produced low levels of dopamine and feels to be in a sluggish or bored state, and creating movement is an easy way to provide their body with/stimulate their mind to keep them focused on tasks that are dull, like listening to a lecture.

ADHD has also made me crave stimulation. For example, working on complex technical work, like learning how to perform confirmation psychiatry, or producing something by hand, tend to have a way of holding my attention for a period of time and up to 4–8 hours continuously. But, not continuously for a few days. Other people might tire of doing these tasks, so I will usually get engrossed in the task and become incredibly focused on the task if it is difficult enough or interesting enough. During these times, I may lose track of time, and continue working until very late in the night and do not realize it.

This abnormal way of perceiving will help to form my identity. I have typically been very self-critical and monitored myself closely because I have such a hard time completing simple, everyday tasks, so I've become adaptable and quick to respond to challenges both personally and in the workplace. I have become a much more spontaneous person, and will develop ways to do things differently than what I have previously experienced to successfully accomplish tasks. The atypical perceptual way of perceiving the world creates a distinct awareness of being different than others.

### The Architecture of Order: An ASD Perspective

Laview is a 17 year-old autistic transgender female who was born in Japan but now resides in Shenzhen. She has a heightened sense of all her senses, including sound, touch, and visual overloads, and can quickly be overwhelmed by these experiences. As researchers have found, many autistic individuals have unusual reaction to sensory experiences and have problems processing their senses (Ben-Sasson et al., 2009). As an autistic and transgender female, she also experiences pressure from society to act in accordance with both of those identities. As a result, she finds it exhausting just to get through day-to-day life.

Laview has to suppress some of her autistic behaviours in order to conform to the expected behaviours of neurotypical individuals (neurotypical individuals are the majority of our species who are not diagnosed with a neurodevelopmental disorder). She frequently encounters moments where her gender identity is questioned or misunderstood by other people. While these issues don't define her entire life, they lead to feelings of stress, burnout, or social withdrawal. Over time, Laview has learned to be more conservative and has become very protective of her energy.

In Laview's experience, the gender dysphoria she faces relates not just to her gender identity, but also to sensory distress. She finds it unbearably uncomfortable to experience facial hair growth， which is different from feeling upset about having facial hair. This demonstrates that people who experience significant sensory sensitivity may experience more pain or discomfort associated with gender dysphoria or gender incongruence than those who do not. Studies indicate that individuals with autism have significantly higher rates of dysphoria than neurotypical individuals (Kallitsounaki & Williams, 2023). Laview is also an asexual person — this is best considered her opinion rather than being a universal trait of people who are autistic. Laview prefers that her relationships have emotional intimacy but experiences anxiety and discomfort when her partner wishes for physical intimacy with her.

These experiences have shaped who Laview is in many ways. She is straightforward, honest, and does not accept social hypocrisy. Her preference for routine, dependability and logical order also provides her with a sense of predictability, which allows her to manage sensory sensitivity. This is consistent with research that suggests that autistic individuals prefer sameness and predictability (Gotham et al., 2013). She also prefers that she dress in androgynous clothing as opposed to traditional feminine clothing styles as it is more comfortable and personally authentic for her individual expression.

### The Triple Masking: An AuDHD (Autism and ADHD) Perspective

Chinami is a 22-year-old transgender woman who also has autism and ADHD, studying at the City University of Hong Kong. Her experience is marked by contradictions. A portion of her is excited to try new things and have different experiences. The other portion wants to stay routine-based, have control, and create predictability. The two paradoxes of wanting both the new and routine can at times conflict with each other in everyday life.

For someone who has both Autism and ADHD, the brain can be compared to having the gas pedal and brake pedal pressed at the same time. The autistic part of somebody wants to put together the most perfect plans and stay within rigid routines. The ADHD part is unable to follow through on these tasks as a result of lower dopamine levels, so rather than follow through with completing the task, the individual may become overwhelmed with the rigidity of the plan while still trying to complete the task (e.g. the autistic part is constantly trying to figure out the social cues according to the logic of the social continuum, but the ADHD part doesn't have enough time to stop and think of the logical solution because it is a lot of work).

In order to manage their cognitive load, an individual will often have to be able to complete three different functions simultaneously when having a conversation: suppressing their autistic behaviours, controlling their ADHD behaviours, and maintaining their identity as a transgender person. For example, they will try not to interrupt, make eye contact, and find hidden meaning in the conversation while also adjusting their voice or body language to communicate with other individuals. This means that individuals will need to wear what are referred to as "three layers of masks or facades" while communicating with other individuals; those masks are: autism, ADHD and/or transgender background. Although it is difficult for her to do this, her high intelligence provides her with the skills to succeed at this type of masking. She is fortunate in that most neurodivergent individuals do not possess the same intelligence level, and therefore, are less capable of successfully achieving the same degree of success as she has achieved while utilizing three different masks or facades.

Research indicates that camouflaging is associated with negative mental health outcomes for those with Autism, as documented in the concept of burnout, which is often described as a long period of time of continual strain and having to regulate oneself (Khudiakova et al., 2024; Mantzalas et al., 2022). However, through this experience, Chinami has developed a high degree of emotional awareness and observational capacity. She can analyse and assess the social situation in a short period of time and can quickly adjust her behaviour to match the specific situation in question.

She has developed a personality that is both adaptive and cautious. She has a great deal of empathy for people, is sensitive to other people's feelings, and also is protective of herself because she has spent the majority of her life being scrutinised and judged. Her personality illustrates how continual adjustment has led to the development of both social competence and emotional fatigue.

### The Social Mirror and Conclusion

From these examples, we see that personality development occurs as the result of an interaction between one's own experience of the world and their social experience of the world. Social experiences can either build or destroy trust; when someone feels misunderstood, doubted, or judged, it is likely that they will develop an attachment style that is guarded, anxious, or withdrawn. On the other hand, when someone is respected and supported, they are much more likely to develop an attachment style that is confident and open. This process of developing personality in relation to social experiences is influenced by the degree to which the social expectations of an individual shape (or limit) their ability to express certain personality traits (Wrzus & Roberts, 2017).

Another important point is not to make the mistake of assuming that all neurotypical people have the same personality or all neurodivergent people have the same life experience. While some individuals who exhibit behaviours that are consistent with social norms or expectations may experience smoother lives on a daily basis, other individuals who are seen as engaging in unfamiliar or socially unacceptable behaviours are likely to feel pressured to explain themselves.

This pressure is also present in institutional contexts and the medical field. Many autistic adults encounter barriers to communication, sensory processing and systemic issues when accessing healthcare (Arnold et al., 2024; White Hughto et al., 2017). In addition, many transgender adults experience an array of structural barriers to accessing gender-affirming medical care. When individuals are unable to obtain appropriate care as a result of these barriers, this may lead to damage to their trust in the healthcare system and their sense of self-worth, as well as to their feeling that they are constantly required to validate their identity and their experiences to others.

Ultimately, personality development results from an interaction between one's biology, life experiences and the social context; for neurodivergent people, perceptual experiences will frequently influence how an individual experiences their life. The examples provided throughout this essay illustrate how different styles of perceiving the world can produce very different ways of coping with life, as well as different value systems and social norms. Understanding this phenomenon does not mean reducing people to their medical diagnoses or mental health status, but rather acknowledging and valuing people's lived experiences.

## References

Arnold, S. R. C., Bruce, G., Weise, J., Mills, C. J., Trollor, J. N., & Coxon, K. (2024). Barriers to healthcare for Australian autistic adults. *Autism, 28*(2), 301-315. https://doi.org/10.1177/13623613231168444

Ben-Sasson, A., Hen, L., Fluss, R., Cermak, S. A., Engel-Yeger, B., & Gal, E. (2009). A meta-analysis of sensory modulation symptoms in individuals with autism spectrum disorders. *Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 39*(1), 1-11. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-008-0593-3

Gotham, K., Bishop, S. L., Hus, V., Huerta, M., Lund, S., Buja, A., Krieger, A., & Lord, C. (2013). Exploring the relationship between anxiety and insistence on sameness in autism spectrum disorders. *Autism Research, 6*(1), 33-41. https://doi.org/10.1002/aur.1263

Kallitsounaki, A., & Williams, D. M. (2023). Autism spectrum disorder and gender dysphoria/incongruence: A systematic literature review and meta-analysis. *Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 53*(8), 3103-3117. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-022-05517-y

Khudiakova, V., Russell, E., Sowden-Carvalho, S., & Surtees, A. D. R. (2024). A systematic review and meta-analysis of mental health outcomes associated with camouflaging in autistic people. *Research in Autism Spectrum Disorders, 118*, 102492. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rasd.2024.102492

Mantzalas, J., Richdale, A. L., Adikari, A., Lowe, J., & Dissanayake, C. (2022). What is autistic burnout? A thematic analysis of posts on two online platforms. *Autism in Adulthood, 4*(1), 52-65. https://doi.org/10.1089/aut.2021.0021

Mette, C. (2023). Time perception in adult ADHD: Findings from a decade: A review. *International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 20*(4), 3098. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph20043098

Micoulaud-Franchi, J.-A., Lopez, R., Vaillant, F., Richieri, R., El-Kaim, A., Bioulac, S., Philip, P., Boyer, L., & Lancon, C. (2015). Perceptual abnormalities related to sensory gating deficit are core symptoms in adults with ADHD. *Psychiatry Research, 230*(2), 357-363. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2015.09.016

White Hughto, J. M., Rose, A. J., Pachankis, J. E., & Reisner, S. L. (2017). Barriers to gender transition-related healthcare: Identifying underserved transgender adults in Massachusetts. *Transgender Health, 2*(1), 107-118. https://doi.org/10.1089/trgh.2017.0014

Wrzus, C., & Roberts, B. W. (2017). Processes of personality development in adulthood: The TESSERA framework. *Personality and Social Psychology Review, 21*(3), 253-277. https://doi.org/10.1177/1088868316652279